When you think about it, it's not a departure.
You know, all my books, all my work is about power, the use of power, the abuse of power.
The first Watergate book, All the President's Men, it's really about the power of the press.
So it's about Bob and me, and about presidential power.
The Final Days, obviously, is about the abuse of power.
The memoir, Loyalties, is really about the McCarthy era and the abuse of power.
This book is about the great event of our era, which is the fall of communism.
and the use of power i mean there's there's certainly dogmatic power that this pope exercises there's certainly uh repressive power within the institution uh that he uses uh some people would say that he abuses his power
in terms of women, in terms of descent in the church.
You can certainly make that argument.
But this is really about the most, you know, the great event of our time in this country was Watergate.
The great event in our time, historically, period,
is the fall of communism.
And there's no way to understand the fall of communism until now, until this book, actually.
I think there's been this huge piece of the puzzle missing, which was the role of the Pope.
You don't mind this right here?
No.
It's going to make it a lot easier.
Not a bit.
Yeah, we're ready.
Now we start to understand the role of the Pope.
And of Reagan, and the two of them working along parallel lines.
So you're working for ABC Pacific.
have some international experience.
I guess that explains why you took on a collaborator for this book.
Let me give you the history of the book.
I did a cover story for Time magazine saying that Pope and Reagan had collaborated secretly to keep solidarity alive in Boston.
Wake me up.
Keep solidarity alive in Poland.
And this was the great turning point in the Cold War.
I then was asked,
by Doubleday, actually, turns out, to do a book on Reagan and the Pope.
And I said, no, I've done the story.
That's that.
It took me a year to do the story.
It was a huge undertaking.
It's been an undertaking for a magazine.
It's been a year and a hard read for jumping in on that.
No, it was close to a year.
And, you know, it was a very difficult story.
But then, to my amazement, Gorbachev,
wrote a response to my story two weeks later in La Stampa.
Yes.
So to my amazement, Gorbachev wrote a response in La Stampa that the New York Times ran, saying, yes, and without this pope, none of the events in Eastern Europe would have occurred.
It's amazing.
It is.
And at that point, I said to myself, I know, you know, you write a story and you hope, well, maybe the Vatican will react, maybe the president will react, maybe it doesn't get your attention, doesn't it?
And I said to myself, you know,
This story is an even bigger story than I thought.
So at that point, and meanwhile, the Pope in the post-communist era particularly had taken on the whole of conventional Western morality.
So I said, this man, this is the great story of our time.
And if anybody would have told me 25 years ago that at the end of the century, the Pope of Rome was the great...
world leader, I would have said, you're smoking something.
But obviously, I lack the knowledge of the Vatican and of church history to put my reporting into the context if I'm going to do a biography of a pope.
I need to have someone around me who understands church history and understands the Vatican as an institution, and that has studied it for years and years.
So I went looking for a collaborator who had such a background, and I decided that the best of the Vatican journalists was Marco Politi, then of Messaggero.
who also had covered the Soviet Union for five years, which was perfect.
And so he is able to supplement my reporting and bring a dimension to interpretively, particularly, the book just never could have had otherwise.
I would say access to sources to... To some extent, though surprisingly enough,
I ended up having better access to sources in the church.
And especially since you hadn't covered Moscow or the Vatican, maybe by reputation?
Yeah, I think by, one, by being an American, by being... Who you are?
Yeah.
Marco certainly had more sources in the Soviet Union, though basically the reporting in the Soviet Union really was something that we did...
together which which was in fact we used and associated and to get to get the Politburo documents that's that was the important thing you don't mind my jumping around no but how essential well those documents are historic they
Very sure, but were they sent you into the study in your view?
Oh, absolutely.
I mean, again, they're stunning.
And they say three things.
One, they show that they show
the preoccupation with the Soviet leadership about this pope and about Solidarity and the fact that their hands were tied in Poland within 10 weeks.
And there's a Politburo minutes that we got for October 29, 1980, within 10 weeks of the signing of the Gdansk agreements, just two and a half months after the beginning of Solidarity.
Grezhnev opens the meeting and says, the counter-revolution is in full force.
runs through the whole country.
People bow to the Pope on his knees, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And then Gromyko says, we can't lose Poland.
The Soviet Union lost 600,000 officers and soldiers to liberate Poland.
We cannot lose Poland.
What an extraordinary moment.
And then in April, six months after
Solidarity is formed.
Ustinov, the defense minister, says, tells the Politburo, we can lose all the achievements of socialism because of what's happening in it.
All the achievements of the revolution.
Six months afterwards, the guys in the Kremlin, you know, until this book, we had no idea that within six months,
The people in the Kremlin knew that they were on the ropes, that communism was being tested as it had never been tested before, and that they could lose the whole communist empire.
They were talking about it.
First time we know this.
So those Politburo documents, and they have to make you wonder about the assassination as well.
We're about the same age, and I have to say,
Even at this age, you still get that wonderful feeling that you're on the track of a good story.
Absolutely.
Was there a point at which you said, hey man, this is good stuff.
Well, the Palapura Minutes, but also I got the first time I've ever used the Freedom of Information Act to this effect.
Well, it's not.
It's the second time they gave me the basis of a book.
I forgot about it.
I used the Freedom of Information Act for my parents' FBI file in my book.
And this time, I got the Walters documents.
I got the actual cables that Walters sent back to the White House, the State Department, and the CIA from his visits with the Pope.
And it was astonishing.
The first time I got them back, they were excised, to the point where you really couldn't tell much.
And then I filed an appeal.
And I happened to know some people who intervened in the appeal process.
So I got to them.
And they're unbelievably revealing.
I mean, they show, you know, they say, I told the Pope of the need for absolute secrecy about the overhead photography, meaning the satellite photos that Walter showed.
You can just see the two of them hunched over the desk and talking about it.
So what you get in this book is, you know, they talked about a hundred different things.
This wasn't just about Poland.
This wasn't just about the Soviet Union.
It was Latin America.
It was, you know, the church in the United States followed parallel courses and exchanged information and judgments on...
Nicaragua, Salvador, Chile, Argentina, Philippines, as well as humanitarian things, famine in Africa.
You weren't going to be able to do an interview with Pope.
No, I didn't know that.
I was really hopeful that he would see us.
I thought there was a real chance that he would.
You know, he's documented a difference to journalists apparently.
Well, it's true, but I thought the fact is that I was able to get to the people closest to him, Cardinal Descour, nobody had ever talked to before.
And I went to see Cardinal Descour half a dozen times on his book.
You were talking earlier about being able to make contact, and why was I able to do it a little more than my partner on this?
They also have a view in the Vatican of the Vatican journalist that's rather contemptuous.
Well, they call him Vaticanisti.
And Marco, of course, is much better than that.
He's the best of the Vatican journalists, and he's a brilliant interpreter.
of what's going on in the Vatican.
And European reporting is a little different than American reporting.
It's not nearly so much... More impassioned, perhaps?
No, it's more interpretive and less initial getting of information.
It's more interpreting events than getting original information.
So I was able... Not as much legwork, in other words.
Not as much legwork, yeah.
So I... Delmarco was able to get to some people in the Pope's childhood that were very important.
Yeah, that was fascinating.
And you did very good work on that.
Thank you.
You don't mind if I eat and talk?
Please, please.
We're working.
It's a nice look at this, isn't it?
Yeah.
So, Marco had European languages, which I lacked.
He speaks fluent German, fluent French, Russian, Italian.
had been married to someone Polish, so that helped in Poland a little too.
Do you think that there was anxiety on their part that this might be hostile?
Absolutely.
I think they still think it's hostile to an extent, because I saw the AP story, there's no comments from the Vatican, which is interesting.
There couldn't be more
mistaken, of course, but they believe that talking about an alliance, an informal alliance, you know, there was no signed agreement between the Reagan administration, they all like to acknowledge that there was an alliance, because it portrays the Pope as a temporal figure,
rather than as a solely spiritual figure, I think they're very short-sighted about this.
I think particularly because the Pope, I know the heart of the Pope's message is to live in the truth.
And to have difficulty acknowledging publicly
The truth of what his role was and how it interacted with other temporal forces is a little sad.
How about, I mean, the question cracks me up.
Did you bring any baggage to this kind of a project?
What do you mean?
preconceptions about the Pope, I mean, a viable figure as an individual.
How is it all basically I'm going to learn and then I'll report as I go along?
You must at some point have to start making judgments.
I think the only preconceptions I have is that I have very few preconceptions because I knew so little about
about the church and the papacy as institutions.
And what little I knew about the character of the man, I had read, and I never very much trust these things until I get involved.
How do you emerge from this, judging his intellect, his mind?
He's brilliant.
Really?
Yeah.
brilliant he he has a system philosophically he's look he's he's a poet he's a philosopher he's a theologian he's uh he is a political leader he's a spiritual leader he's
he's an actor has been an actor he's mesmerized the greatest crowds in the history of the earth you can't do that without incredible intellect well you've got an 800 million audience well but it's not well well other popes have had 800 million that's not that's what he's gone beyond right he's he goes out and sees them
And he preaches before a million and a half people in a meadow.
This has never happened before.
You know, the real question about greatness is... What makes great leaders is...
What do they do with the opportunities they're dealt?
And both the Pope and Reagan did incredible things with the opportunities they were dealt.
One of the interesting things to me, you talk about preconceived notions,
I'm a liberal.
I'm one of the few people in America that still calls himself a liberal.
But I mean, my basic values are those of liberalism, both in the philosophical sense and in the sense of the American political vocabulary.
I had a view of Reagan's administration until I started on this story for Time magazine.
as a really negative view.
I still don't like what he did in terms of the domestic politics of this country.
I think his domestic policies were disastrous.
And I think he had a very weak grasp of the real conditions of America.
However, his intuition and actions
about the soviet union and soviet empire and poland and the pope were brilliant amazing and and we and we have we have to give him credit particularly those of us in the media and who might be predisposed the other way that you know i went to see him in 91 when i did the time magazine story and i said
How did you?
The first thing he said to me about the Vatican, he said, I wanted to make them an ally.
It's in the book.
Nope.
The other thing he did with the Pope, he said, Yalta can't stand.
Yalta cannot stand.
That it's morally wrong.
I mean, the two of them, as I wrote,
considered a proposition so radical that no leaders in the West had ever embraced it, that the Soviet Union would collapse more for moral reasons than for strategic ones.
I think it's a combination.
No, no.
I think one reason that it couldn't be sustained economically is it couldn't be sustained morally.
That if the economics don't work, partly because nobody wants to work, because the moral basis of it is absent.
As the Pope says, the man, creative man, individual man,
is not recognized.
Do you see this book as a biography in a classical sense?
It's certainly a hybrid.
I never knew quite how to do it.
I mean, except to do it.
I knew that it could not be a conventional biography.
It had to have a spine of it that was Poland and the confrontation
with totalitarianism.
And that includes the confrontation with Nazism, because he grew up under the Nazis, and I knew that that had to be the spine of the book, and yet it had to be a biography.
So that this book had to be a combination of biography, history, journalism, and dramatic narrative.
Very unusual.
So that meant that though it had to cover a 76-year life, I did not want to give an equal number of pages to every 10-year period.
So that...
The way to do this, I thought, was almost cinematic.
To pick seeds and periods that were really important thematically and maybe devote 30, 40, 50 pages to a one-year period of his life.
and then three pages to the next ten years.
So, therefore, we took sex and young people and did that thematically because young people figure so much in his schema and the role.
There are really four, I guess, themes in this book.
are four elements of his life, his mysticism.
He's a mystic.
Now, as the other surprise, I didn't know he was a mystic when I began on this.
When the first person told me that he prayed stretched out on the floor like Christ on the cross, I about fell over.
Turns out it's not quite as rare as I thought originally.
But still, again, nobody knew this.
People don't know that this Pope lays down on a cold marble floor with his arms stretched out every day.
And that he draws inspiration this way.
Think about it.
I mean, that's kind of an amazing thing.
So he's a mystic.
So there's that aspect of his character in life.
There's his confrontation with communism and the alliance with Reagan, which obviously is the heart of the book, both dramatically and in terms of his impact on our era.
It's the longest section of the book.
It's a 150-page section and then another 50-page section, and it also even opens with that in the prologue, and to some extent it ends with that as well.
So there's that.
Then there is his relationship to women.
Which is, he is both at ease with women in a way that no Pope probably has been on a personal level, and yet he has a tormented relationship to womankind.
that of course has been the most difficult aspect of his papacy in terms of, can I have some decaf?
You know what, I have a double decaf espresso.
Has been the subject of more dissent in the church.
and from non-Catholics than any other area of his papacy.
And talk about surprises, this relationship with Madame Timoniska.
I mean, I was blown away by it.
Yeah, well, you really tried to find out about her, if there was any kind of... I mean, you really pressed her on that.
Well, first of all, I went... Oh, was that the talk I heard, that maybe there was something?
Nobody ever heard of this woman.
What happened was I saw that she was...
Well, because it became, because one, I had gone to, by the time I saw her, I had been to see Professor Williams, and I knew that there was some kind of attraction between the two.
But what happened was I was looking for people who had spent time with the Pope so that I could get a more intimate picture of them.
And of course, here was this woman who, as far as I could see, had never figured in any papal biographies.
And yet, she had been his editor and his collaborator.
So I went to see her, and the next thing I noticed, she started telling me about their 90 pieces of correspondence socked away, and the Pope betrayed her, and all this other stuff.
I was amused to read that she's actually, for a while, she's been suing them for copyrighting.
But...
And she said to me, I talked to her a couple weeks ago, before the book came out, because I wanted her to know what I had said, so that she didn't get deluged and surprised by a pack of reporters on her lawn or something.
And the only thing that she took any exception to was that Professor Williams had described her as...
infatuated and she said no no no no well what she said was infatuation implies being swept off your feet in a one-way relationship she said she said to me this was a mutually affectionate relationship
Not physical, but mutually affectionate.
And I think that's right.
I think it was, and he is.
You know, it continues this religion.
Are you mindful of certain taboos?
Of course.
It's very important not to misrepresent what that wrote to a surname.
It's very... Pardon me?
And it doesn't help you having a Jewish surname.
No, that doesn't.
That doesn't matter.
I'm not worried about that.
You've got to be careful.
No, I... Look, you have to be careful as a person, as a journalist.
You have to be respectful of any... I mean, we were respectful of Nixon.
We were respectful of the presidency.
I mean, I don't think you go after... You're looking for information.
You're looking for context.
You're looking for understanding.
You're not looking for... Look, I come away from this project thinking this is one of the great men of the century.
Having said that, let me just jump ahead.
He did point out he's getting older and infirm and maybe times are passing him by.
And maybe the interests of the people in the church.
Maybe he has watched his whole trip should be going.
You talk about women, you talk about...
The church is moving along.
Absolutely.
The church now has less binding relevance on the church.
No, I'm not finished yet.
Than he did 15 years ago.
Absolutely.
His power is diminishing within the church.
No question about it.
Things are starting to slip away.
From him?
From his power.
His power of the position.
His power.
You don't know what's going to happen with the position.
But you suggest that he's the last of them.
I suspect that's the case.
You don't know for sure.
And, you know, when you discuss quite brilliantly, I think, I mean, you really did get some good sources on the election process.
Absolutely.
I thought that was terrific stuff.
That is Marco, incidentally.
Yeah, that's true.
Marco did, with the exception of the scene of him crying, which I came up with, Marco did the election.
Yeah, it was good.
It was really...
And I've not seen anything like that before.
Another thing I have to say jumping around here is what I like.
And this is in no way meant as a rapid, you know, procedure, but you do name your sources here.
Well, absolutely.
I think we've kind of gotten away from our...
It depends.
It depends, but it's easy.
I like to see the names across.
Well, if it serves a... It's a very difficult thing.
I felt strongly that
that if possible, I wanted this book to be, partly because the revelations are so stunning, I wanted people to know where the information came from.
And with very few exceptions, I was able to
name the sources and there are only about three anonymous sources in the whole thing you have footnotes which i like yes now now but i i would hate that to be implied as a criticism of uh of either bob
Or my earlier work.
No, I wouldn't do it with your earlier work.
Because there's no way we could have done that work without using anonymous sources.
We could not have written any of those books without anonymous sources.
But I think 20 years later, it's become too easy.
And speaking of your former colleague Rob, I think he uses it.
He hasn't been making a comment yet.
to access that's my take on it i don't think he does but um and i think also that it's very easy and obvious in bob's most recent books to see who he's talking to he doesn't take a brain scientist and he makes it easy for the reader i mean anybody can tell on the previous book not his last one that he talked to mrs clinton
you know, can't reach the briefcase.
But anyway, I think that one thing that you do get out of this is that this is more of a book for the record.
Yes, obviously.
No, if I had it, I wanted, I do think there is too much use of anonymous sources when it's not necessary.
I think it's particularly common to be in daily journalism
a convention used to elude the truth and to write lies.
I mean, I think the gossip columns are full of it.
The terrible thing that's happened in journalism is that the truth is no longer the basis of journalism, too often.
And I've written extensively about it, as you probably know.
I wrote a cover story from the New Republic called Idiot Culture about talk show values, tabloid values, and...
19... I can get it for you if you need it.
Call the New Republic.
They'll get it for you.
19... Not necessarily for this piece, but I'm working on a new book.
You should get it.
It's the first piece written about this subject, and it started a real debate.
Within the last five years, he said.
It's about... I've got it upstairs, actually.
I need the copy I have with me.
It's a cover story.
It's called Idiot Culture, and it's 1992.
I really love it.
1992.
I think we talked about the Pope's relevance today.
So you think that his shot was made, basically.
I mean, his moment arrived and he sees it.
No, no, but yes.
Well, absolutely.
But he's also, it's not just the fall of communism.
Though he has...
being out of touch in some ways particularly with with what's happened with women i mean i think that you have to see the the failure the one great failure of his papacy is in the area of women i don't think there's any question any question about it
And even people around him acknowledge that.
Some people around him acknowledge it, not most of them, but some.
Nonetheless, you also have to remember that though he rails against the age, our age, and against modernism, and against moral relativism,
There is a great validity to his criticism of our time.
It is an upbringing.
He does speak from a humanism that is unique among the world's leaders with the possible exception of Mandela.
He does talk about, in a way that no other leader, again Mandela might be the exception, about the disparity of people's incomes, about racism, discrimination, nationalism, tribalism.
He understands it in a way, and what it's doing to our age in a way that no other leader does.
It's remarkable.
He has more to say to our time, even though he is out of touch in some ways.
He has a basic grasp of the failures of our age.
Yeah, he's remarkable.
Going back to win his election in 1978, and I'd forgotten that it was absolutely at the same time as the skies falling around.
I mean, you forget that these things happen almost at the same time.
Of course, when you're big now, look, put yourself in the shoes, and you're so huge in here looking at this going on over there.
Somebody who was strong on doctrine, who was a humanist,
and who was not an Italian by the time of the last ballot.
Or the last ballot is amazing.
But there was not a strong Italian you point out.
Right.
And finally, someone who had some familiarity with the confrontation with communism.
And who was able to engage communism on a spiritual level.
And he had as much or more experience than anyone in this regard.
It's important to remember that Poland is a unique entity in the Catholic world.
It is the only country in the Catholic world
at the time, it was 95% Catholic in a communist country.
You think it'll be another 450 years before they have another night?
I don't have a clue.
Oh, you must have an idea.
No, no.
Do you think I would have any idea?
Well, 400 years, the idea of me talking about the next 400 years would be absurd.
Might the next one be Italian?
Yes, it might well be.
But again, nobody knows.
And...
I think that the Cardinals also are going to be looking for a rest.
This guy has worn them out.
There's been incredible tension in the church during this papacy, not just over doctrine, but the struggle with communism.
in a strange way was enervating.
It focused the activities of the Pope and part of the papacy on this war, this war for the souls.
This was a new crusade, but it was conducted not on a strictly ideological level, but on a spiritual level.
So, I think the Cardinals, to the extent that you can generalize, would like a little peace and quiet for a while, and would like to move toward
the women in their church and do something about this schism, this fissure.
Right.
Yeah, this is good.
So they rank folks the way they rank presidents, you know, I guess.
Do they rank them?
Do they evaluate them?
Sure.
But he is going to be, he's obviously one of the great folks.
I guess with Leo XIII and John XXIII are the great ones of the last hundred years.
Well, sure.
I mean, this man's impact is huge.
This is just speculation here.
Do you think he was mindful?
When you think of, you know, a folk having an influence on world defense, and you also call Reagan, Reagan amazing, by saying, World War II could have been prevented.
And then we think of how the, of the, of the,
Of course he was, because he grew up in Poland.
Now I was going to say, the one other theme that we haven't discussed in the book is that of Jews and Judaism.
That's the other great theme of his life.
He's the first folk since Peter to grow up in a Jewish milieu.
He grew up in a town with a 20% Jewish population.
His schoolmates were Jewish.
A good portion of his class at his high school died at Auschwitz.
He was Archbishop of the diocese that included Auschwitz.
And he had a Jewish landlord.
He's the first pope to set foot in a synagogue since Peter.
He went to synagogue, as we recount, to hear the Kol Nibir sung on the high holidays with his father, to hear this renowned cantor.
Of the two girls he was most attracted to as a youth, one was Jewish, Ginka Rosenfeld, Ginka Beer,
To this day, the friends from his youth that he is from his high school that he's closest to is Jewish.
I'm drawing a blank, but you know what I mean.
So, and he recognized the state of Israel over the objections of his own curia.
And perhaps his last great act, which is to plan for the Jubilee year, or the Millennial year, is to dedicate the year to Catholic reflection on anti-Semitism and the Inquisition.
I mean, this is extraordinary.
This church can never again embrace anti-Semitism as a result of this concept.
Do you come away from this with any unanswered questions to you?
Sure.
I got a lot of questions I'd love to see answered.
I'd love to talk to him about women.
I'd like to hear him explain to me.
I mean, that scene in the book with Sadiq is just chilling.
the UN.
I'd like to know what he feels about other individual leaders of our time.
I'd like to
These are the questions you'd have asked him, I gather.
Yeah, well, except I know I wouldn't get an answer.
I mean, you know, what do you think of the Queen of England?
I don't think he's going to say, well... Right.
Well, I'd like to talk to him about his mother.
I'd like to talk to him about the circumstances of his...
exactly what does he know about the circumstances of his mother's death, about how pregnancy weakened.
Clearly there is a relationship, one of the other things in this book, between the circumstances of his birth and his views that have to do with abortion.
His mother's life probably could have been saved had she had an abortion.
Or had she not become pregnant with him?
Amazing.
Interesting.
I've got about two minutes.
I'm sorry, because I've got to be able to tell this.
So for two minutes, a minute and a half, if they had given you an hour, one hour, just like I would ever do.
i would have said tell me about your mother that would have been your first question just like that tell me about your mother what do you remember i would have asked him to reflect on his views about women and his mother um i would i would i would have liked i would have asked him more
I would like to hear in his own words his feelings about Gorbachev.
Yes, and a check please.
So they wouldn't have been factual questions?
No.
Because that you can get anywhere.
Yeah, of course.
No, they have to do with philosophical...
Oh, yes, absolutely.
How do you want me to make it out?
That's what I mean, Nick, right?